Manual section on the pointer manipulation API (#1804)
well-typed/hs-bindgen: manual/LowLevel/Translation/05-PointerManipulation.md

# Pointer manipulation API

Suppose we want to override one value nested in some C data structure. We could
use the `Storable` instances to `peek` the value, then override the appropriate

> field, and finally `poke` the updated value. However, it may well be undesirable

Reviewer: "it is undesirable"? is there a case where it is desirable? I can't really think of one. (Maybe to keep referential transparency in non-monadic code?)

Author: Good question. I suppose I assume that a Haskeller's usual approach would be to read the full value off the pointer to modify it and then write it back, rather than moving around the pointer to the right offset and doing the modification there. The benefit of the former is that a developer can treat C data structures as pure Haskell values without having to care too much about pointers. And that's fine in many cases unless you care about the minutiae of performance and your structures are large, in which case I'd recommend using the pointer manipulation API

Author: In any case, since there are so many ways to interact with C data structures and pointers, I would frame it as "may or may not be desirable"

Author: I've added a new paragraph. If you are asking yourself the question about whether or not it is desirable to use the API, then future readers might too :smiley: 

> Whether or not it is desirable to use the pointer manipulation API depends on
your case. Our recommendation would be to use it if your data structures are
large and you care about performance.

manipulation, and also the infrastructure in `hs-bindgen-runtime` that supports
it.

## Feature list

The pointer manipulation API supports:

* Indexing of struct fields through a pointer
* Indexing of union fields through a pointer
* Indexing of bit-fields (for both structs and unions) through a pointer
* Erasing `newtype` sugar (introduced by `typedef`s or macro-defined types) from
  a pointer type
* Convering a pointer to an array to a pointer to the array's first element

## Example

Let's consider an example to illustrate how to use the tools offered by the
pointer manipulation API. We define a `point` struct that is used twice in a
`rectangle` struct[^1]:

```c
struct point {
  int x;
  int y;
};

struct rectangle {
  struct point topleft;
  struct point bottomright
}
```

We generate Haskell bindings for these structs, which look roughly like so
(details omitted):

```hs
data Point = Point
  { point_x :: CInt
  , point_y :: CInt
  }
deriving ... instance Storable Point

data Rectangle = Rectangle
  { rectangle_topleft :: Point
  , rectangle_bottomright :: Point
  }
deriving ... instance Storable Rectangle
```

> If we want to modify a pointer to a `rectangle`, then we could choose to fully

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we want to modify the target of a `rectangle` pointer, we could choose to fully
```
(?)

marshall the value to a Haskell value and back. We first read the value off the
pointer, modify it, then write it back[^2]:

```hs
example1 :: Ptr Rectangle -> IO ()
example1 rectPtr = do
      rect <- peek rectPtr

>       poke rectPtr $ rect & #rectangle_topleft % #point_x .~ 2

Reviewer: Maybe we could separate the second phase "modify the value" into a `let` binding, to make it even clearer?

Author: makes sense! will do
